import Image from 'next/image';
import { ArticleLayout } from '@/components/ArticleLayout';
import BaseballChart from './components/chart';

export const meta = {
  author: 'Spencer Nicol',
  date: '2023-05-12',
  title: 'Machine Learning Crash Course',
  description:
    'Regardless of your background or expertise, gain a better understanding of machine learning concepts and techniques. Drawing from the highly regarded Machine Learning Crash Course by Google, this article offers insights and notes to expand your knowledge and confidence in this rapidly growing field.',
};

export default (props) => <ArticleLayout meta={meta} {...props} />;

<Image
  src='https://media.publit.io/file/machineLearningCrashCourse/machine-learning-crash-course.jpg'
  width={800}
  height={400}
  alt='Machine Learning Crash Course'
/>

As someone who has worked on data projects that involve "feature engineering"
predictive models, I know firsthand how challenging it can be to have meaningful
conversations with data scientists about the features I've provided. Although
I've gained some knowledge and experience in this area, I've never felt
completely comfortable discussing machine learning concepts and techniques with
others in the field.

That's why I've decided to create this crash course article, aimed at anyone who
wants to gain a better understanding of machine learning, regardless of their
background or expertise level. My goal is to provide an accessible and
informative resource that highlights some of the key learnings I've gained from
taking the
["Machine Learning Crash Course by Google"](https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course).
This course is a highly regarded resource for those looking to gain a
foundational understanding of machine learning concepts and techniques. By
sharing what I've learned, I hope to help others expand their knowledge and
confidence in this exciting and rapidly growing field.

## Introduction

The course starts off by introducing the benefits of using machine learning,
such as reducing time spent on programming, customizing and scaling products,
and completing seemingly "unprogrammable" tasks. One of the most compelling
benefits of machine learning is that you don't have to tell the algorithm what
to do - you just need to provide it with lots of examples so that it can figure
out what to do on its own.

Additionally, the course emphasizes a philosophical reason for learning machine
learning: it changes the way you think about problem-solving. Machine learning
is a field that teaches computers to recognize patterns in data and make
predictions based on those patterns. This approach aligns more with the way
natural sciences solve problems by observing patterns and making predictions. In
contrast, traditional mathematical sciences rely on formulas, equations, and
rules. By learning machine learning, you can broaden your problem-solving skills
and potentially discover innovative solutions that may not have been apparent
using traditional mathematical approaches.

## Supervised Machine Learning

Supervised machine learning is one of the primary types of machine learning,
where models are created to predict labels for new data based on past examples.
A model is a mathematical function that maps features to labels. The model
learns to identify patterns in the training data and use those patterns to make
predictions on new, unseen data. When training a model in supervised machine
learning, we need to provide two key pieces of information: labels and features.

**Labels** are the output variables that we're trying to predict. It's often
represented by the variable $y$ in linear regression models. The label could
represent a wide range of things, from the type of animal in a picture to the
sale price of a house. Labels are important because they define the problem
we're trying to solve and help us evaluate the accuracy of our model's
predictions.

**Features** are the input variables used by the model to make predictions.
They're often represented by the variable $x$ in linear regression models.
Features can take many forms, such as numeric values, categorical values, or
even more complex data types like images or audio. In supervised machine
learning, the goal is to identify which features are most predictive of the
label we're trying to predict.

### Example: Spam Detector

Let's say we want to create a supervised machine learning model to predict
whether or not an email is spam. First, we need to create a labeled dataset. A
labeled dataset is one where we already know the outcome, and this will serve as
our training dataset. Here's an example of what a spam detector dataset might
look like:

| Subject Length | Has "Free" | Has "Urgent" | Unknown Sender | Label    |
| -------------- | ---------- | ------------ | -------------- | -------- |
| 10             | Yes        | No           | No             | Spam     |
| 8              | No         | No           | Yes            | Not Spam |
| 25             | Yes        | Yes          | Yes            | Spam     |
| 18             | No         | No           | No             | Not Spam |
| 15             | No         | Yes          | No             | Spam     |

I selected four common features associated with spam emails for this dataset,
which also includes a binary label column indicating whether each email is
classified as spam or not.

Once we've trained our model with labeled examples, we use that model to predict
the label on unlabeled examples, also known as inference. In the spam detector,
unlabeled examples are new emails that humans haven't yet labeled. This is an
example of binary classification, where the model predicts whether an email is
spam or not spam.

In addition to binary classification, supervised machine learning includes
several other types of tasks. Regression is another type of supervised learning
that predicts a continuous numerical value, such as a house price. There are
also other types of supervised learning tasks, such as ordinal regression and
time series prediction, which differ in the nature of the output variable and
the type of problem they solve. In the next section, we will explore linear
regression, which is a fundamental supervised learning type.

## Linear Regression

Linear regression is a type of machine learning that helps us make predictions
based on input data. The goal is to find a line that best represents the
relationship between the input features and the output variable. We can use this
line to make predictions about new data.

For example, let's say we want to predict the strikeout rate of a baseball
batter based on the pitch velocity of each pitch they receive. We can plot the
data on a graph, with pitch velocity on the x-axis and strikeout rate on the
y-axis. We can then fit a line to the data points that best represents this
relationship. The line will have a slope and y-intercept, which can be used to
predict the strikeout rate of a batter based on the pitch velocity they receive.

<BaseballChart />

To train the model, we need to find the values of the slope and y-intercept that
minimize the difference between the predicted values and the actual values in
our training set. We do this by adjusting the values iteratively until the model
learns the best slope and y-intercept. We can use a loss function, such as the
mean squared error (MSE), to measure how well the model is performing during
training. Once the model is trained, we can use it to make predictions on new
data.

That's the basic idea of linear regression!

## Reducing Loss

Reducing loss is a crucial part of many machine learning algorithms, including
linear regression. The goal of reducing loss is to find the best-fitting model
that can accurately predict the output of a given input. This is done by
minimizing the difference between the predicted output and the actual output. In
the case of linear regression, the mean squared error is used as the loss
function. By minimizing this error, we can obtain a model that best fits the
data and makes accurate predictions. Gradient descent and learning rate
adjustments are two techniques commonly used to minimize the loss function and
improve the performance of linear regression models.

### Gradient Descent

Gradient descent is a popular optimization algorithm used in machine learning to
find the minimum value of a function. In the context of linear regression, the
function being minimized is the mean squared error, which measures the
difference between the predicted and actual values of the dependent variable.

Gradient descent works by iteratively adjusting the model's parameters in the
direction of steepest descent of the cost function. The size of each adjustment
is determined by the learning rate, which is a hyperparameter (adjustable
parameters that determine the model architecture and affect the model's
performance) that needs to be tuned. While gradient descent can be very
effective at minimizing the loss function, it can also get stuck in local minima
or diverge if the learning rate is set too high. Therefore, careful tuning of
the learning rate and initialization of model parameters is necessary for good
performance.

### Learning Rate

The learning rate is a hyperparameter that determines the step size at each
iteration while moving toward a minimum of a loss function. It controls how much
the model parameters are adjusted with respect to the gradient of the loss
function.

Selecting an appropriate learning rate is crucial for training a machine
learning model. A high learning rate can lead to rapid learning but may cause
the model to converge to a suboptimal solution or diverge entirely. On the other
hand, a low learning rate can result in more accurate results, but the learning
process may take longer.

There are various techniques for selecting the best learning rate, such as
manually adjusting the value, using pre-defined methods like learning rate
schedules or adaptive learning rates, or performing a search across a range of
possible values.

One common technique for setting the learning rate is to use a learning rate
schedule. This is a function that determines the learning rate over time, with
the learning rate being high at the beginning of the training process and
gradually decreasing as the model gets closer to the optimal values. Common
learning rate schedules include step decay, exponential decay, and time-based
decay.

Using a learning rate schedule can help the model converge faster and more
reliably, but selecting an appropriate schedule can be difficult and requires
some experimentation.

### Recap: Reducing Loss and Optimizing Models

Now that we've explored the intricacies of reducing loss, gradient descent, and
learning rates, it's natural for these concepts to appear complex and
overwhelming. However, it's important to remember that at their core, these
techniques serve a common purpose: minimizing the difference between predicted
and actual values. They are valuable tools that data scientists utilize to
fine-tune models and improve their performance. Don't worry if these concepts
seem intricate for now – our goal is to provide you with a solid understanding
of machine learning concepts.

## Generalization

Generalization is a fundamental concept in machine learning that helps us create
models capable of making accurate predictions on new, unseen data. When we train
a model, we need to be mindful of overfitting, where the model becomes too
focused on the training data, making it less effective when faced with new
examples.

To achieve good generalization, we strike a balance between capturing important
patterns in the data and avoiding overly complex models. This balance involves
considering two factors: bias and variance. Bias refers to the error introduced
by simplifying the model, while variance refers to its sensitivity to variations
in the training data.

By finding the right balance between simplicity and complexity, we ensure that
our models can capture meaningful patterns without getting too caught up in
specific details. This allows them to generalize well to new cases and make
reliable predictions.

To evaluate the generalization ability of our models, we use a separate dataset
called the test set. This evaluation provides an indication of how well the
model is likely to perform on new, unseen data. If the model performs well on
the test set, we can have more confidence in its ability to generalize
effectively.

It's important to keep in mind that generalization relies on certain
assumptions. We assume that the training and testing examples represent the
real-world data well, and that the underlying data distribution remains
consistent. However, these assumptions may not always hold true in dynamic
environments or when the data changes significantly.

In summary, generalization allows us to build models that can make accurate
predictions on new, unseen data. By finding the right balance between simplicity
and complexity, considering the bias-variance trade-off, and being aware of the
underlying assumptions, we can develop reliable models that generalize well to
real-world scenarios.

## Training, Validation, and Test Sets

Training, validation, and test sets are essential components of machine
learning. They help us develop and evaluate models effectively. In addition to
the training and test sets, there is another crucial set called the validation
set. Let's explore the role of each set and how they contribute to the model
development process.

### Training Set

The training set is used to teach the model. It contains labeled examples that
enable the model to learn patterns in the data and make accurate predictions.
During the training process, the model adjusts its parameters to minimize the
difference between predicted and actual values. The training set provides the
foundation for the model's understanding and helps it generalize to new
examples.

### Validation Set

The validation set plays a crucial role in model development. It serves as an
intermediary step between the training and test sets. The validation set is used
to fine-tune the model's hyperparameters and assess its performance during the
training process. By evaluating the model's predictions on the validation set,
we can make adjustments and optimize the model's architecture and
hyperparameters.

The validation set allows us to experiment with different configurations, such
as varying the learning rate, adjusting the model's complexity, or exploring
different optimization algorithms. By comparing the performance of different
models on the validation set, we can select the best-performing one for further
evaluation on the test set. This iterative process of training, validation, and
adjustment helps us refine the model and improve its performance.

### Test Set

The test set is the final benchmark for evaluating the model's performance. It
contains examples that the model hasn't encountered during training or
validation. The test set allows us to assess how well the model generalizes to
new, unseen data and make reliable predictions in real-world scenarios. By
measuring the model's performance on the test set, we can gain confidence in its
ability to make accurate predictions and assess its effectiveness in solving the
intended problem.

It's important to note that the test set should only be used sparingly. Once the
model has been evaluated on the test set, it should not be further adjusted or
fine-tuned based on its performance. Using the test set for iterative model
development can lead to overfitting, where the model becomes overly specialized
to the test set and performs poorly on new examples.

<Image
  src='https://media.publit.io/file/machineLearningCrashCourse/training_validation_test.png'
  width={800}
  height={400}
  alt='Training, Validation, and Test Sets'
/>

By carefully partitioning the data into training, validation, and test sets, we
can develop models that learn from the training set, optimize their performance
using the validation set, and assess their generalization ability on the test
set. This three-way partitioning enables us to build robust and reliable models
that demonstrate their effectiveness across diverse datasets and real-world
scenarios.

## Feature engineering

Feature engineering transformins raw data into a format that the model can
effectively utilize. Here are some key points to consider:

1. Understand the Data: Gain a deep understanding of the dataset to make
   informed decisions during feature engineering. Study feature characteristics,
   identify missing values or outliers, and analyze relationships between
   variables.

2. Select Informative Features: Choose relevant features to reduce
   dimensionality and eliminate noisy or redundant information. Techniques like
   correlation analysis, statistical tests, and domain knowledge can guide
   feature selection.

3. Create New Features: Generate additional features that provide valuable
   insights. Combine, transform, or extract information from existing features.
   For example, create interaction features or derive patterns from text,
   images, or time-series data.

4. Handle Missing Data: Address missing values appropriately. Impute missing
   values using techniques like mean, median, or regression imputation. Consider
   creating new features to indicate missing values.

5. Normalize and Scale Features: Scale features to a consistent range to prevent
   dominance by larger-magnitude features. Techniques like standardization and
   normalization can improve convergence speed and model performance.

Tips and Tricks:

- Domain Knowledge: Incorporate domain knowledge to identify relevant features
  and transformations that align with the problem you're solving.

- Iterative Process: Experiment with different feature combinations,
  transformations, and selections to find the most effective set of features.

- Regularization: Consider regularization techniques to automatically select
  informative features and reduce the impact of noisy or irrelevant ones.

By performing feature engineering, we improve the model's ability to learn
patterns and make accurate predictions. It involves understanding the data,
selecting informative features, creating new ones, handling missing data, and
scaling features appropriately.
